docs(external docs): VRL iteration support highlight article (#12795)
vectordotdev/vector: website/content/en/highlights/2022-05-18-vrl-iteration-support.md

  domains: ["vrl", "remap"]
tags: ["vector remap language", "vrl", "dsl", "iteration", "enumeration"]
---

Since we launched **Vector Remap Language** (VRL) [more than a year ago][], the
language has seen a massive growth in both usage, and feature richness. While we
intentionally left the core language in a stable state since its launch, we
_have_ been steadily expanding the [standard library][], increasing
[performance][], adding [event enrichment features][], and [squashing many
bugs][].

One of the last major pieces missing from the language — and one requested by
many of you — is support for mapping collections. We are happy to announce that
as of Vector 0.22.0, this feature is now available.

Let’s take a look at iteration in VRL, and how it works.

## Usage

Let’s take a simple example:

```json
{
  "foo": true,
  "bar": { "bar": "" },
  "baz": "",
  "qux": ["a", "b", "a", "c"]
}
```

Let’s assume we want to achieve the following results:

1. Upcase all keys in the object.
2. Change all empty string values to `null`.
3. Count the number of equal elements in the `qux` array.

Here’s how we would solve these individual tasks:

```coffee
# 1. Upcase all keys in the object.

> . = map_keys(., recursive: true) -> |key| { upcase(key) }

Reviewer: _Technically_ does this need to be run at the end so `.qux_tally` is upcased too? 😆

Reviewer: No? We upcase before the key is created, so it does come out lowercased - which is technically correct in the spirit of the program, but _maybe_ not aligned with "goals"

Either way was a very nitty-joke observation 😄

Reviewer: Definitely fine as-is, it was a very "technically_correct.jpg" moment when I noticed that _not all keys are upcased!_

# 2. Change all empty string values to `null`.
. = map_values(., recursive: true) -> |value| {

>   if value == ”” { null } else { value }

Reviewer: ALSO bad at examples, and generally end up reaching for something users have been asking to be able to do, replacing `.`'s with `_`'s is one that comes to mind (though that style of operation is already covered with the upcase example).

I'll noodle on it a bit/scroll through discord to see if anything else jumps out as a good show-and-tell.

>   if value == ”” { null } else { value }

Author: I figured I could combine this comment with yours about linking to the RFC, by linking to a larger list of examples _in the RFC_:

https://github.com/vectordotdev/vector/blob/50dd7a7c655cbc3c7903b58213adb34a70cf7ba6/rfcs/2021-08-29-8381-vrl-iteration-support.md#use-cases

😄 

I'll keep this one around, but also link out to those.

>   if value == ”” { null } else { value }

Reviewer: OH - that's smart 👍

>   if value == ”” { null } else { value }

Author: Actually, I'll _also_ list to our list of tested/maintained examples that are linked to that RFC, in our test harness:

https://github.com/vectordotdev/vector/tree/master/lib/vrl/tests/tests/rfcs/8381

>   if value == ”” { null } else { value }

Author: Resolved in 619ecdf2c.

}

> # 3. Count the number of equal elements in the `qux` array.

Reviewer: Wouldn't this be more like "Counting the occurrences of elements in the `qux` array."?

Author: Yeah, that does seem like a better description 👍

Reviewer 2: I've typically seen this called "frequencies" too so something like "count the frequency of elements in the `qux` array" is another option.

Author: Resolved in 619ecdf2c.

.qux_tally = {}
for_each(.qux) -> |_index, value| {
  tally = int(get!(.qux_tally, [value])) ?? 0

  .qux_tally = set!(.qux_tally, [value], tally + 1)
}
```

Running this VRL program results in the following output:

```json
{
  "FOO": true,
  "BAR": { "BAR": null },
  "BAZ": null,
  "QUX": ["a", "b", "a", "c"],
  "qux_tally": {
    "a": 2,
    "b": 1,

>     "c": 1
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    "c": 1
    }
}
```

This should also make the file diff coloring below happier.

Author: Resolved in 619ecdf2c.

---
title: "VRL iteration support has arrived!"
short: "VRL iteration"
description: "Remap all your collections using iteration functions."
authors: ["JeanMertz"]
date: "2022-05-18"
pr_numbers: [12317]
release: "0.22.0"
hide_on_release_notes: false
badges:
  type: announcement
  domains: ["vrl", "remap"]
tags: ["vector remap language", "vrl", "dsl", "iteration", "enumeration"]
---

Since we launched **Vector Remap Language** (VRL) [more than a year ago][], the
language has seen a massive growth in both usage, and feature richness. While we
intentionally left the core language in a stable state since its launch, we
_have_ been steadily expanding the [standard library][], increasing
[performance][], adding [event enrichment features][], and [squashing many
bugs][].

> One of the last major pieces missing from the language — and one requested by
> many of you — is support for mapping collections. We are happy to announce that
> as of Vector 0.22.0, this feature is now available.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One of the last major pieces missing from the language — and one requested by
many of you — is support for mapping collections. We needed to introduce this
feature thoughtfully since mapping can be a common source of performance
and reliability bugs (i.e., infinite loops). And our design accomplishes this by
providing opinionated mapping functions that align closely with the use case.
So, without further ado, we're happy to announce that as of Vector 0.22.0,
mapping for collections is now available!
```

I took a stab at explaining the reasons and advantages of our approach. Feel free to take it or leave it. I think it's good high level context for the user that helps to continually position Vector as the fast and reliable tool.

Author: I like it 👍 Applied in [2bd54ad](https://github.com/vectordotdev/vector/pull/12795/commits/2bd54ad9eecfbe1fe189f0692657aa824b703a31), with a few additional tweaks.
